# Honey, I Can't Find the Comparative Advantage

## Summary

In Fall 2022, I examined empirical evidence for comparative-advantage-based trade. Using UN and World Bank data involving 1,242 country pairs over 15 years, I see if differences in the sector breakdowns of two economies relate to their trade volumes when controlled for distance, size, and other gravity trade model attributes. I find that sector differences has a limited, unstable relationship with trade volumes, implying most global trade is not motivated by comparative advantage. 

## Data and Framework

I use economic sector differences as a surrogate for comparative advantage. The World Bank sector breakdowns data provides information about a country's economic activity in four categories: Industry, Agriculture, Manufacturing, and Services. To calculate the sector differences between a country pair, I sum the absolute value difference for each industry (Equation 1). I examine whether this is related to total trade volumes between the two countries (defined as imports plus exports). I control for the "Gravity Model" of international trade, which posits trade volumes depend on the proximity of countries and their size, not unlike physical gravity's strength between two masses. All the 1,242 country pairs I examine have one of the following nations as a party: the United States, China, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, India, Brazil, and South Africa. The other nation in the trade relationship can be any country in the world (including the seven listed). I had to limit the dataset because gathering data was painful and other countries do not report trade statistics consistently. Thus, I chose trade relationships with these countries, which I selected due to their size (the first 5 are the largest economies in the world) and geographic distribution (Brazil is the largest economy in South America and South Africa is the largest economy in Africa). 

## Findings, Meaning, and Limitations

Through simple OLS regressions, I show that my measure of comparative advantage has an unstable or negative relationship with trade volumes--meaning, countries that have more similar economies trade more with each other. This challenges economic thought dating back to Adam Smith, which assumes countries specialize and trade accordingly. Instead, the analysis suggests trade flows are dominated by intra-industry trade.

However, we can excuse some of this by reexamining the measure of comparative advantage I use. The sector differences metric only includes four sectors, which might hide valid comparative advantages by pooling them into one industry (for example, if a country manufactures airplane parts and ships them to a foreign country that puts together the whole airplane, both those activities are "manufacturing" even though these different kinds of manufacturing suggest a comparative advantage). A better measure of comparative advantage would disaggregate industries when performing this analysis. Also, there might be selection bias since each country pair had at least one of seven countries as a party. Future research should review both of these data limitations to better understand comparative advantage.
